Toward the end of his life, Joshua assembled all the tribes of Israel and gave a moving farewell speech.
In it, he recounted how Jehovah protected them.
Listen to his conclusion as recorded at Joshua 24, 14, and 15.
Therefore fear Jehovah and serve him with integrity and faithfulness, and remove the gods that your forefathers served on the other side of the river and in Egypt, and serve Jehovah.
Now, if it seems bad to you to serve Jehovah, choose for yourselves today whom you will serve, whether the gods that your forefathers served on the other side of the river,
or the gods of the Amorites in whose land you are dwelling, but as for me and my household, we will serve Jehovah.
Did Joshua motivate his listeners?
Verse 16 says,
At this, the people answered, it is unthinkable for us to abandon Jehovah and to serve other gods.
Verse 31 adds that Israel continued to serve Jehovah all the days of Joshua and all the days of the elders who outlived Joshua.
This teaches us something about how we can conclude a discussion effectively.
Our final words should connect to the overall topic.
Motivate our listeners and be simple and brief.
Let's watch the following conclusion of a public talk.
So, brothers, during these critical times hard to deal with, let's follow the council in today's talk, because with Jehovah's help, we can endure life's challenges, and when he brings an end to this world and all its problems will survive to live forever in a beautiful paradise.
What do you think? Did the speaker connect his conclusion to the overall topic?
Could you identify the theme of his talk from this conclusion?
And while it's good that the speaker tried to motivate his audience, was he specific? Did he speak with a note of finality? Let's give him another chance.
So, brothers, although we live in times of distress, may we always remember how Jehovah helps us.
He offers us his powerful Holy Spirit. He provides support through our loving Christian brotherhood, and he gives us a hope.
Therefore, when facing trials, let's throw our burdens on Jehovah, confident that he will sustain us.
This time, the speaker rephrased the theme, where can you get help in times of distress, and he restated the talk's three main points.
He motivated his listeners by reminding them how to benefit from Jehovah's provisions.
His conclusion was simple and brief.
How might we apply these principles in the ministry?
In the following example, a brother named Aaron is talking to a workmate named Mark, who recently attended his grandfather's funeral.
Aaron sees an opportunity to witness informally, so he tells Mark about the resurrection and shows him John 528 and 29.
Now, how might Aaron effectively conclude their conversation?
So, Jesus promises to resurrect those who've died?
Interesting.
Well, guess we better get back to work.
Not much of a conclusion, was it?
Let's watch him try again.
So, Jesus promises to resurrect those who've died.
Interesting.
What do you think that promise means for your grandfather?
In his conclusion, Aaron connected the topic of their conversation to the death of Mark's grandfather.
But a good conclusion should also motivate your listeners and show them what to do with the information they learned.
Let's watch the rest of Aaron's conclusion.
So, Mark, during those times when your grandfather's death makes you especially sad, think about Jesus promise that death is not the end.
Imagine what it'll be like to see your grandfather again.
That helps me when I'm sad about relatives I've lost in death.
Thanks for sharing that.
Sure.
Maybe when we talk next time, I'll show you what Jesus said about.
Well done.
After repeating the main point for Mark to remember, Aaron motivated him to reflect on the resurrection hope during times of sadness.
Aaron could have also tried to motivate Mark to accept a Bible study to come with him to a congregation meeting or some other specific action.
And your conclusion is effective.
Your audience will remember your theme and main points and be motivated to apply what they learned.